In this lesson we will learn about the CSSA property named transition.
This property allows us to animate or transitions smoothly between two different values.
Now this is a bit difficult to describe in words.
So let's see it in action in front of you is an example page.
And I want you to focus on these links in the header.
Notice that when I hover over a particular link it lights up with a white background and the color of
the text changes to blue.
Now the CSSA code used to create that hover effect is nothing new.
We've reviewed the hover pseudo selector in an earlier lesson.
So we're simply styling the links and then we're using this pseudo selector to say once one of the links
has hovered over apply these unique styles so we're swapping out the background color and the color
of the text.
However the transition between the non-covered state and the hover state is very abrupt.
So the links immediately within one millisecond go from one style to the other.
Now what if we wanted to alter this behavior so that the transition between the two style States took
a full two seconds to complete.
So that way the human eye could see all of the intermediate states and color gradations between white
and dark blue.
Well this is where the transition property comes into play.
So in our style sheet within the room for the links I will add a new property named transition property
.
This is where we can specify which properties the web browser should keep an eye on and watch for changes
So let's begin with the color of the text color.
Next I will add an additional property named transition duration.
This is where we can specify how long the transition should take.
So I will say two seconds to s to a file save and refresh we can see that the background changes immediately
but the color of the text takes two seconds to transition from white to dark blue.
And if we also wanted the background color to take two seconds to transition in our transition property
after color we can include a comma and then spell out background color.
So if we save and refresh you can see now both properties use the full two seconds to transition very
smoothly between the two states.
And here's a quick tip that can save you a bit of typing.
If you want all of the properties to transition you don't need to spell them out.
You can simply type all the all keyword is very useful.
I find myself using it most of the time but I did want you to be aware that you do have the flexibility
to specify specific properties if need be.
So we've learned how to transition smoothly between two values.
But let's be honest fading between two different colors is not that exciting.
So let's try something a bit more adventurous.
Now if I scroll down the example page bit you'll see this image with a caption positioned over it that
has a transparent black background.
We learned how to create this effect in an earlier lesson in the course.
But that was a few lessons ago.
We now have a few more tricks up our sleeve.
Let's imagine that we want the caption area the black box to be hidden by default and we don't want
it to display until we hover over the image and we don't want it to abruptly appear.
We want to gradually fade or transition or animate the caption into view.
Now in our age TNL the caption area for the image has a class of banner description so I will search
for that in my style sheet.
Here is the corresponding rule and the first thing that I'm going to do is hide the content by default
.
Now there are many ways to achieve that.
I'm going to use the method where I push the content down and then on hover.
I'll pull the content back into view.
So let's use the transform property and use the translate.
Why function.
So we want to push the content down so it's out of view.
Now instead of trying to count how many pixels down we want to push it.
If we use a value of 100 percent it will use the height of the content itself and move down that much
.
So for example if I save and refresh we see that the caption box has been pushed down the perfect amount
Now clearly the caption box is still visible and we want it to be hidden initially.
Now to hide this caption we can rely on our h TMLC structure so we know that this is the caption content
has a class of banner description and it lives within the div with a class of image banner.
So this is the elements parent.
Now in our stylesheet we can target that parent element and say that any child content that has been
pushed out of this parent's boundaries should be hidden.
So with overflow.
Hidden in place if we refresh we can see the caption is now Kadin.
So we are now free to attempt to transition or animate the caption into view when we hover over the
image.
So I'm going to create a new rule any time we hover over the parent image banner live we want to apply
new styles to the banner description or caption box.
So initially we used transform translate y to push the content out of view.
We can simply copy and paste that into this new selector and say that instead of being pushed down.
Use a value of zero or just sit where you normally would.
So this line of code will make the caption content visible while we are hovering over any part of the
image.
However this is a lesson about the transition property so we don't want to abruptly transition between
completely hidden two completely visible in one millisecond.
We know that the translate y function positions content and if we can see all of the intermediate steps
and transitions between these two values we have the beginnings of an animation.
So within the rule for our Baner description element Let's include a property of transition property
.
All transition duration.
One second.
Now if we save and refresh and hover over the image it slides or animates into view and it is silky
smooth.
Next let's take things a step further and not only have the caption contents slide into view but fade
into view from a transparency perspective.
So within the original rule we can set the opacity to zero and then within our hover rule can set the
opacity to want and because we set transition property to all the browser will look for any and all
changes on hover.
So if we save and refresh we see that the opacity of the caption content is also being transitioned
.
So now we have a very need sliding and fading effect taking place.
So the caption box is complete.
Let's talk for a moment about the image itself.
Let's imagine we wanted the image itself to pan or zoomin when it is being hovered over we can achieve
this effect very easily.
So within our stylesheet here is the rule that targets the image element.
Lets simply create a hover rule so when we hover over the image banner element we want to target the
image.
Now to create a zooming or painting effect we can say transformed scale one point five and let's be
sure to add the transition property to the image element.
Transition property all transition duration.
1 second.
Now I have to let you in on a bit of a secret.
We don't need to type this out as two properties.
The shorthand is simply transition all one second so that saves us a bit of code.
So with that in place if we refresh we can see that when we hover over the image it then uses a scale
using the transform property of 1.5.
And because we set the parent element to overflow.
Hidden the image doesn't spill out of the container when it zooms in.
Obviously we have the transition property to thank for the animation effect so we get to see all of
the intermediate steps between a scale of 1 and 1.5.
Spread out over 1 second.
Now if we wanted a very gradual or slow effect we can increase the transition to 3 seconds.
So anything is possible and hopefully this encourages you to experiment with transition effects on your
own.
Now let's try one last final experiment very quickly before the lesson ends at the bottom of the sample
page.
We can see a circle element.
Lets work together to create an effect so that when we hover over the circle it rotates 360 degrees
.
This element has a class of box B.
So I will search for that in the style sheet.
Here it is.
Let's create a hover based rule for the element box B hover.
So when the element is hovered we want to use the transform property and rotate the content 360 degrees
we save and refresh.
We see nothing happens because without an animation or transition we don't see the 360 degree change
it's a full rotation.
So if we set the transition to all one second we can actually watch the circle rotate.
Now this circle example is an excellent opportunity to introduce you to one more property transition
timing function.
This controls the acceleration in d acceleration of the transition.
So if I set this to linear you'll notice that the animation plays at a steady speed.
But if I provide a different value ease in you can see that the animation begins slowly and then finishes
fast.
Or if I provide a value of ease out it starts fast and ends slowly.
You can also try ease in out and it will start slowly.
Perform fast and then end slowly.
Now if we don't include this line at all.
Most web browsers by default will use a function named IIS which is similar to ease it out except that
it starts slightly faster than it ends.
Now we technically do not need to include an entirely separate property.
We can simply add a keyword of the timing function at the end of our transition line.
So this is the standard shorthand syntax for the transition property you specify which properties you
want to transition.
How long the transition should take and the method you would like to use for the acceleration and the
acceleration of the transition and that will bring this lesson to a close to review.
We learned that the transition property can be used to smoothly and seamlessly see all of the intermediate
steps between two different values.
Now in this lesson we used the hover pseudo selector to create situations where elements were receiving
different values.
The transition property can be used for much more than hover effects but for the time being we are working
under the assumption that you do not know javascript at this point.
So the hover scenario is your best bet to experiment and learn about the transition properly.
I encourage you to have a bit of fun and create your own unique transition effects because in our next
lesson we're going to take things a step further by comparing and contrasting CSSA transitions with
actual C S S animations.
It should be a lot of fun.
I will see you in the next lesson.
Just a quick heads up that if you have a spare moment or two I would really appreciate it if you could
go and rate and review this course.
I hope you're enjoying the course and finding it helpful.
But even if you're not above all else an honest review is the best review and I would love for prospective
students to be able to see honest impressions of the course.